
# mobster <a href='https://caravagn.github.io/mobster'><img src='man/figures/logo.png' align="right" height="139" /></a>

<!-- badges: start -->

[![Travis build
status](https://travis-ci.org/caravagn/mobster.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/caravagn/mobster)
[![Lifecycle:
maturing](https://img.shields.io/badge/lifecycle-maturing-blue.svg)](https://www.tidyverse.org/lifecycle/#maturing)
[![](https://img.shields.io/badge/Part%20of-evoverse-blue.svg)](https://caravagn.github.io/evoverse)
<!-- badges: end -->

`mobster` is a package that implements a model-based clustering approach
to subclonal deconvolution from cancer genome sequencing data
([Caravagna et al.;
https://doi.org/10.1101/586560](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/586560v1)).

The package integrates evolutionary theory and Machine-Learning to
analyze bulk sequencing data of a cancer biopsy - ideally,
high-resolution whole-genome sequencing data (e.g., WGS \>100x).

`mobster` is part of the `evoverse`, a package that gathers multiple R
packages to implement Cancer Evolution analyses; see more [about
evoverse](https://caravagn.github.io/evoverse).

#### Statistical Model

`mobster` implements a `(k+1)`-dimensional Dirichlet mixture model
integrating

  - the theoretical distribution (the model) predicted by Population
    Genetics of within-clone neutral dynamics;
  - Beta distributions (`k`) that capture positive selection - `k` peaks
    generated by non-neutral clonal expansions in the allele frequency
    spectrum.

The model has `K>0` Beta and 1 Pareto component, and can reconstruct the
clonal architecture of a tumour (subclonal deconvolution) integrating
evolutionary theory and Machine-Learning.

## Motivation

The `K` Beta random variables model potential subclones detectable
through the Variant allele Frequency (VAF) distribution, and the Pareto
random variable models a power law tail - predicted by population
genetics - to describe alleles under neutral evolution (within-clone
dynamics).

## Features

`mobster` fits can be computed via moment-matching or
maximum-likelihood, and model selection can be done with several
likelihood-based scores (BIC, ICL and reICL, a new reduced-entropy
variation to ICL). S3 objects allow easy visualization of the data, the
fits and the quality of the model. Parametric and nonparametric
bootstrap routines are
available.

#### Help and support

[![](https://img.shields.io/badge/GitHub%20Pages-https://caravagn.github.io/mobster/-yellow.svg)](https://caravagn.github.io/mobster)

### Installation

*Note that the actual name of the package is spelled lowercase.*

You can install the released version of `MOBSTER` from
[GitHub](https://github.com/) with:

``` r
# install.packages("devtools")
devtools::install_github("caravagn/mobster")
```

-----

#### Copyright and contacts

Giulio Caravagna, PhD. *Institute of Cancer Research, London,
UK*.

[![](https://img.shields.io/badge/Email-gcaravagn@gmail.com-seagreen.svg)](mailto:gcaravagn@gmail.com)
[![](https://img.shields.io/badge/Github-caravagn-seagreen.svg)](https://github.com/caravagn)
[![](https://img.shields.io/badge/Twitter-@gcaravagna-steelblue.svg)](https://twitter.com/gcaravagna)
[![](https://img.shields.io/badge/Personal%20webpage-https://bit.ly/2kc9E6Y-red.svg)](https://sites.google.com/site/giuliocaravagna/)
